
i1
8S ·....
88 Trading cities. 5.
90 Cities and eyes. 4.
92 Cities and names. 3.
94 Cities and the dead. 2.
96 Cities and the sky. 1.
98 · ....
~
loj
105 Cities and eyes. 5.
106 Cities and names. 4.
109 Cities and the dead. 3.
III Cities and the sky. 2.
"4 Continuous cities. 1.
117 · ....
{J
lAl • I •••
124 Cities and names. 5.
126 Cities and the dead. 4.
127 Cities and the sky. 3.
128 Continuous cities. 2.
129 Hidden cities. 1.
IJl · ....
II
'35
'40 Cities and the dead. 5.
'44 Cities and the sky. 4.
146 Continuous cities. 3.
148 Hidden cities. 2.
'5 0 Cities and the sky. 5.
152 Continuous cities. 4.
'54 Hidden cities. 3.
156 Continuous cities. 5.
159 Hidden cities. 4.
161 Hidden cities. 5.
164 ' .....
Kublai Khan does not necessarily believe everything Marco
Polo says when he describes the cities visited on his expedi-
tions, but the emperor ofthe Tartars does continue listening
to the young Venetian with greater attention and curiosity
than he shows any other messenger or explorer of his. In the
lives of emperors there is a moment which follows pride in
lhe 1I0undiess extension of the territories we have conquered,
and the melancholy and relief of knowing we shall soon
give up any thought of knowing and understanding them.
There is a sense of emptiness that comes over us at evening,
with the odor of the elephants after the rain and the san-
dalwood ashes growing cold in the braziers, a dizziness that
makes rivers and mountains tremble on the fallow curves of
lhe planispheres where they are portrayed, and rolls up, one
after the other, the despatches announcing to us the collapse
of the last enemy troops, from defeat to defeat, and flakes
lhe wax of the seals of obscure kings who beseech our
armies' protection, offering in exchange annual tributes of
precious metals, tanned hides, anti tortoise shell. It is the
desperate moment when we discover that this empire, which
had seemed to us the sum of all wonders, is an endless,
formless ruin, that corruption'S gangrene has spread too far
10 be healed by our scepter, that the triumph over enemy
sovereigns has made us the heirs of their long undoing.
Only in Marco Polo's accounts was KNblai Khan able to
5
discern, throllgh the walls and towers destined to crumble,
the tracery ofa pattern so subtle it could escape the termites'
gnawing.
6
Leaving there and proceeding for three days toward
the east, you reach Diomira, a city with sixty silver
domes, bronze statues of all the gods, streets paved
with lead, a crystal theater, a golden cock that crows
each morning on a tower. All these beauties will al-
ready be familiar to the visitor, who has seen them
also in other cities. But the special quality of this
city for the man who arrives there on a September
evening, when the days are growing shorter and the
multicolored lamps are lighted all at once at the
doors of the food stalls and from a terrace a woman's
voice cries ooh!, is that he feels envy toward those
who now believe they have once before lived an eve-
ning identical to this and who think they were
happy, that time.7
When a man rides a long time through wild regions
he feels the desire for a city. Finally he comes to
Isidora, a city where the buildings have spiral stair-
cases encrusted with spiral seashells, where perfect
telescopes and violins are made, where the foreigner
hesitating between two women always encounters a
third, where cockfights degenerate into bloody
brawls among the bettors. He was thinking of all
these things when he desired a city. Isidora, there-
fore, is the city of his dreams: with one difference.
The dreamed-of city contained him as a young man;
he arrives at Isidora in his old age. In the square
there is the wall where the old men sit and watch the
young go by; he is seated in a row with them. De-
sires are already memories.
8
